# NOBO.samplesize.simulations
R and JAGS code for running data simulations to estimate the necessary sample sizes for detecting treatment effects on survival or per-capita productivity (chicks/female) of northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus). From Lewis, W. B., and J. A. Martin. Estimating necessary minimum sample sizes for detecting treatment effects on annual survival and per-capita productivity of northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus).
<br/>
We use data simulations to assess the necessary minimum sample sizes required to detect a difference in annual survival or per-capita productivity between experimental groups (control and treatment). Treatment effects could reflect, for instance, differences in landscape covariates between patches, differential harvest rates, or exposure to management actions. We simulate data under two different baseline values of annual survival (0.12 and 0.22) and productivity (2 and 4 chicks produced per female), and with five treatment effect size (10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, or 100% higher demogrpahic rate in the treatment compared to control group). For example, a baseline annual survival of 0.22 (control group) and 50% effect size corresponds to an annual survival in the treatment group of 0.33. We also vary sample sizes of simulations between 40 and 400 (increments of 40) total birds; i.e., a total sample size of 400 corresponds to 200 birds in each experimental group. We do not incorporate other sources of spatio-temporal variation (e.g., demographic variation between study plots or years) because these had little effect on the main results in a preliminary analysis.

<br/>

## SurvivalSimCode_publication.R
R and JAGS code for simulating and analyzing annual survival datasets is provided in SurvivalSimCode_publication.R. We simulate weekly capture histories for birds over a 104 week period (52 weeks/year and 2 years). We simulate birds as being captured and fitted with radiotransmitters during the first week of March and the first week of October. We divide start times of birds evenly between experimental groups (control and treatment), deployment seasons (March and October), and years (first and second). For example, a total sample size of 400 corresponds to 50 transmitters deployed in each experimental group in each deployment season and year. We specify birds as being alive in the tracking period in which they transmitter was deployed; we simulate the alive/dead state (z) of each individual in subsequent weeks based on a two-step process incorporating survival and radio failure. First, we model the weekly probability of retaining an active transmitter, i.e., the radiotrasnmitter is still attached to the bird and actively transmitting. Next, we calculate the 26-week seasonal survival for each individual in each week based on an intercept, experimental group of the bird, and season of the tracking week. Season is defined as breeding (April - September) and non-breeding (October - March). We specify non-breeding survival being ~ 10 points higher on the percentage scale than breeding survival (e.g., 50% non-breeding and 40% breeding survival). We then convert period survival to weekly survival and simulate weekly capture histories based on a Bernoulli proces and the weekly survival probability, conditional on retaining an active transmitter and being alive in the previous period. We assume perfect detection of birds during telemetry as in other studies. We subset capture histories to the period between deployment and either mortality or censoring, the latter of which occurs on radio failure or if a bird is alive at the end of the study. Lastly, we analyze simulated datasets with a Bayesian known-fate model. The modeling process is the opposite of the data simulation process; however, we do not directly model tag retention because capture histories are constrained to periods with an active transmitter.

<br/>

## ProductivitySimCode_publication.R
R and JAGS code for simulating and analyzing per-capita producting (chicks/female) datasets is provided in ProductivitySimCode_publication.R. We simulated per-capita productivity via a zero-inflated Poisson model based on 1) the probability of successfully hatching at least one nest during the breeding season, and 2) the number of hatched chicks per successful nest. We model both process based on treatment effects. We specify parameters for each submodel such that variation in productivity is ~ 90% driven by variation in the probability of successfully hatching at nest. We do not include spatiotemporal effects on productivity because these had little effect on results in a preliminary analysis.
